from Benelliforum 22 nov 07
c1130r
"I'm no expert, but have learnt a little along the way while I have known Wayne (Tuneboy). It started when he bought a second hand "BEARS" Race 955i triumph with a Motec (very expensive ECU) which I think at the time he pulled to bits (the bike) and did all these really neat things with the engine and gearbox etcetera (disclaimer… this was a while ago so some facts and stuff maybe wrong, so feel free to correct me). Well when he put it all back together we took it to a brake Dyno which, I only knew of your standard type of Dyno which is an Inertia Dyno, this works on a set mass (the drum) and calculates the power and torque on full throttle till you hit the rev limit, so it knows what the mass of the drum is and the speed and time it takes to get to a certain speed. These are those really useless little lines we use to make purchasing decisions on bikes. A brake Dyno works differently, in which the drum mass again is known (constant), however the drum will maintain a constant speed regardless of throttle position (TP), it calculates the power\torque based on braking force it needs to apply (hence the term Brake Dyno) to maintain a constant speed and RPM. So you strap on the bike, put a wide band sensor into the exhaust, this now tells you the lambda value. There is a "sweet spot" which says whether fuel is not being burnt (Rich) or there is oxygen (lean) in the pipe (you can add more fuel), obviously you want the good bit in the middle. Now the interesting thing is, most riding is done at partial throttle positions, especially coming out of corners etc, this is where you probably get the most benefit out of a well tuned engine. So the bike is strapped down with the drum running at say to start with 30 km\hr in 4th gear. There is a minimum throttle position to actually pass the engine braking part, ie the momentum of the drum isn't spinning the rear tyre of the bike and to match the RPM, so you may need 10% throttle position (TP) to actually match the speed. This is the cool bit, because the drum won’t go faster or slower and the RPM remains constant regardless of TP, now you can start to change the fuel pulse width (the amount of time the injector is left open on a cylinder hence amount of fuel) on the fly with the Motec plugged into a computer, and at the same time you can see the lambda value increase or decrease, and the power increase and decrease on the fly from the Dyno readout window, so then you set the right value, move the TP to 15%, 20% TP and so on, and the bike just starts to squat lower and lower and makes more of a laboured groaning sound until you reach 100% TP at which stage you think it’s going to blow up!(I was in charge of the throttle). I found this really cool, because you could actually hear the exhaust note change by changing the fuel mix and you could almost cause the bike to stall or surge by hitting the up or down arrow on the keyboard. Then you start all over again with the drum at a higher speed and the bike at a higher RPM until you go through the entire map which consists of the entire RPM range of the bike and as many TP’s as you can fit in (you average the in-between values), and a bunch of other variables. It gets really fun (and LOUD and HOT) when your around red line, but at this stage you need like at least 80% TP just to match the speed of the drum. All of this takes time, money, sweat, ripped apart tyres (I think we de-laminated the wheel at the end of our session).

Ok, how does this fit in with what we are doing?

You ride around data logging with a wide band sensor, collect information supplied by the ECU, and the wide band sensor onto a laptop, you get information like TP, RPM, Lambda value, calculated load, air temp, pressure, wheel speed etc..... it goes on. You can then take that data and make educated decisions based on what the Lambda value is, and change the pulse width of the map to try and make the Lambda value where it should be...ie the sweet spot for power\torque.... you follow?

Like I said, I really don’t understand this very much… believe me, I’m not kidding!